number 24 this evening, Genesis chapter number 24.
And I mentioned this morning and encouraged you
if you had an opportunity to read the chapter
and someone came and said,
I read Genesis 24 this afternoon, maybe more people did,
but that was an encouragement to me.
And I said, well, you'll be ready to go
for the message this evening, amen.
And we're gonna make our way
through this passage of scripture.
Depending on the size of the font in your Bible,
Genesis 24 is two or three pages
and we're gonna make our way through it
by the grace of God.
We might be here until 7.30,
but by the grace of God, we'll make our way through.
I'm just teasing with you, put your seatbelt on
and we'll get through it, amen.
The Bible says this in verse number one,
and Abraham was old and well stricken in age
and the Lord had blessed Abraham in all things.
You could preach a message just from that verse
of scripture and the reality is that we have traced
the life of Abraham over many, many months now
as we've studied through the pages of the book of Genesis.
And of course, as we look at the life of Abraham,
we would agree as God testifies
that he was a man that had been blessed by God.
And I'm so thankful that every good gift
and every perfect gift cometh from above, amen.
And our God is so good to us
and he has blessed us with so many blessings.
And Abraham is old and well stricken in age.
We find through our text of scripture here
that the real key, the real idea of what's going on here,
the setting, if you will, for the passage of scripture
is the fact that Isaac needs a wife.
And notice as we look at really the first 11 verses
by way of introduction, really what takes place here,
the Bible says that Abraham said unto his eldest servant
of his house.
If you go back to Genesis 15,
I believe that he's speaking here of Eleazar.
That of course is debatable because his name is not used
in the particular passage of scripture.
But often tonight, I will use that name.
If you disagree theologically, we can talk about that later.
But I based that on Genesis 15 in verse number two.
It says that he ruled over all that he had.
And here's what Abraham said to him.
Put, I pray thee, thy hand under my thigh.
And I will make thee swear by the Lord, the God of heaven
and the God of the earth,
that thou shalt not take a wife unto my son
of the daughters of the Canaanites among whom I dwell.
But thou shalt go unto my country and to my kindred
and take a wife unto my son Isaac.
And so we find here in these couple of verses of scripture
that the need is identified, that Abraham reveals
to his servant the need for Isaac to have a wife.
And the responsibility that is placed upon this servant,
Eliezer, is a weighty responsibility.
Can you imagine Abraham coming and saying,
here's the situation, and Isaac needs a wife,
and you're going to be the one that's going to go,
and you're responsible for this.
That is a weighty responsibility.
We find that the servant, Eliezer, responds.
There's a measure of doubt in his response,
as we find in verse number five,
that he says unto Abraham, peradventure,
the woman will not be willing to follow me unto this land.
Must I needs bring thy son again unto the land
from whence thou camest?
And Abraham said unto him, beware thou
that thou bring not my son thither again.
It's very interesting, Abraham says,
no, my son's not gonna go, you're going to go,
and you're gonna bring the wife back to him.
And then notice the faith and confidence
of Abraham in verse number seven.
He says, the Lord God of heaven,
which took me from my father's house
and from the land of my kindred,
and which spake unto me, and that swear unto me,
saying, unto thy seed will I give this land,
notice this, he shall send his angel before thee,
and thou shalt take a wife unto my son from thence.
You know, the reality is that as we look
through this text of scripture this evening
and study the entirety of this chapter,
I believe with full confidence
that the faith and confidence of Abraham,
as it's revealed here in the introduction,
has an impact upon his servant.
You know, when you believe God and you speak
with a measure of confidence about what God is able to do,
you have the ability to influence and impact other people
to also have faith and confidence in God.
Abraham was a man that had walked with God.
Abraham was a man that had seen God provide.
He, of course, as we studied the 21st chapter
a few weeks ago as the birth of Isaac,
and he'd waited 25 years, I mean,
God had given that promise and the fulfillment
of that promise just as God said he did
what he said he would do, and Abraham here
with this measure of faith and confidence,
he says that the Lord shall send his angel before thee.
Notice in verse number eight,
and if the woman will not be willing to follow thee,
then thou shalt be clear from this my oath,
only bring not my son thither again.
So he says here, if she refuses,
I still don't want you to take Isaac to this place.
I do not want Isaac to go thither.
The servant put his hand under the thigh of Abraham,
his master, and swore to him concerning that matter,
and the servant took 10 camels of the camels of his master
and departed for all the goods of his master
were in his hand, and he arose and went to Mesopotamia
under the city of Nahor, and he made his camels
to kneel down without the city by a well of water
at the time of the evening,
even the time that women go out to draw water.
So we see that there is an agreement
in verses nine through 11,
and there is a departure by Eleazar.
He takes all of those goods that are mentioned.
He takes the camels and so on and so forth,
and he enters to this place.
I wanna draw your attention quickly to verse number 50,
give you the title, and then we'll jump right
into the message this evening.
The Bible says, then Laban and Bethuel answered and said,
the thing proceedeth from the Lord.
We cannot speak unto thee bad or good.
As we look at this 24th chapter of the book of Genesis,
I wanna preach a message that I've simply entitled,
the thing proceedeth from the Lord.
I'm so thankful that God has a plan, amen.
I'm so thankful that God is able to bring his plan to pass,
amen, and as we look at this passage of Scripture
this evening, I trust that you would be encouraged
and that you would be strengthened in understanding
that our God has a plan.
He has a plan for your life, he has a plan for my life,
and we can rejoice greatly in knowing
that he doeth all things well.
Notice, if you wanna take notes this evening,
number one, he, speaking of Eleazar,
he requested God's favor.
In verses 12 through 14, we find that Eleazar
prays to the God of heaven.
We find that he requests the favor of God.
It says in verse number 12, and he said,
O Lord God of my master Abraham,
I pray thee, send me good speed this day
and show kindness unto my master Abraham.
Now, notice as we look at this prayer
as it's recorded in these three verses of Scripture,
that his prayer was both genuine and specific.
The reality is that we need to learn,
even as I mentioned this morning
about the prayer life of Epaphras,
it is important that we as the people of God
learn to pray specifically.
That we do not just simply pray in general terms,
but we pray specifically.
The reality is that Eleazar could have stopped praying
in verse number 12 and simply said,
send me good speed this day
and show kindness unto my master Abraham.
And that could have been his prayer.
And then he's left to determine,
did God show kindness or did God not show kindness
and so on and so forth.
But we find the genuine nature
in the specific prayer of Eleazar.
It says, behold, I stand here by the well of water.
The daughters of the men of the city
come out to draw water.
Notice what he says in verse number 14.
Notice how specific he is.
And let it come to pass that the damsel to whom I shall say,
let down thy pitcher, I pray thee,
that I may drink and she shall say, drink.
And I will give thy camels drink also.
Let the same be she that thou hast appointed
for thy servant Isaac.
And thereby shall I know that thou has shown kindness
unto my master.
I love the prayer of Eleazar.
I love the specific nature of what he prays.
He says, I'm here by this well of water
and the women are going to come out for that was the time,
according to what we see in verse number 11,
it was the time of the evening,
even the time that women go out to draw water.
And he says, let it come to pass.
He's gonna approach one of these women
that come to draw water and he's going to say,
let down thy pitcher that I may drink.
He never met her before, has no idea who she is.
She has no idea who he is.
He's just gonna say, let down my pitcher that I may drink.
And then he says this, that she shall say, drink,
and then she will say, I will give thy camels drink also.
Okay, that's pretty specific, right?
And he said, let it be the same one
that's to be the wife of my master,
of my appointed for thy servant, Isaac.
And then he says this at the end of the verse,
at the end of verse number 14, and thereby,
shall I know that Thou hast showed kindness
unto my Master?"
He prayed for kindness generically,
if you will, in verse number 12,
but then he says, here's how I'm gonna know
that you've shown kindness,
because I'm asking specifically for you to do something,
and when you do specifically what I'm asking you to do,
I'll know that that's your hand.
I've not manufactured the circumstances on my own.
I've not created the situation
so that I could try to have my hand in it.
No, there's nothing I can do about this.
There's no way I can figure out
which the bride is, who the bride is to be for Isaac,
and God, I just need to trust you,
and I'm praying that you would work this way.
What a prayer.
We find that he requested God's favor.
I will say this, if you're taking notes,
in verse number two, he recognized God's provision.
I love that the Bible begins in verse number 15.
It says, and it came to pass before he had done speaking.
You know, there are times in which God answers
the prayers of his people,
even while we're still praying the prayer.
I mean, it came to pass before he had done speaking
that behold, Rebekah came out,
who was born to Bethuel, son of Milcah,
the wife of Nahor, Abraham's brother,
with her pitcher upon her shoulder.
And the damsel was very fair to look upon a virgin,
neither had any man known her.
And she went down to the well
and filled her pitcher and came up.
And the servant ran to meet her and said,
let me, I pray thee, drink a little water of thy pitcher.
This is exactly how he prayed, right?
He said, there's gonna be one that's gonna come,
and the one that I approach and say, let me have a drink,
and man, he's doing his part, he's gone,
and it says that he asked for a drink,
a little water of thy pitcher.
And she said, in verse number 18, drink, my Lord.
And she hasted and let down her pitcher upon her hand
and gave him drink.
And when she had done giving him drink, she said,
I will draw water for thy camels also
until they have done drinking.
Can you imagine?
I mean, I want you to put yourself
in the text of Scripture this evening
and put yourself in the life of Eleazar
and be in that situation.
You've just prayed super specific
about this responsibility that has been given to you
by Abraham, your master, and you've prayed specifically,
and it's unfolding right before your eyes.
She says, drink, and he drinks, and she says,
I'm gonna go draw for the camels that they may drink also.
That's exactly what he prayed.
We find that as he's recognizing God's provision,
that it's exactly what he prayed for.
We find that in verse number 20, it says this.
It says, and she hasted and emptied her pitcher
into the trough and ran again under the well
to draw water and drew for all his camels.
No doubt, this was a long process.
Camels drink a lot of water.
It's a long process, a labor-intensive process.
And I want you to see Eleazar as he's standing there
in amazement in verse number 21, and it says this.
The man wandering at her held his peace
to wit whether the Lord had made
his journey prosperous or not.
Can you imagine, are there ever times that you pray
and God answers the prayer and you're just kind of like,
really, God answered exactly like I prayed?
Like is this, yes, our God hears and answers prayer.
Yes, our God answers specifically
to the specific requests that we make.
And we find that so often in our prayer lives,
we pray in general terms, we pray generically,
and therefore we fail to even be able to recognize
when God is answering our prayers
because we're not praying specifically,
but the reality is that when we pray specifically,
we see God answer specific prayers.
And how that encourages us
and how that increases our faith, why?
Because we know that God has answered the prayer.
He said this at the end of verse number 14,
and thereby shall I know that thou hast showed kindness
unto my master.
He was going to have this confidence, this knowledge,
because God was going to answer.
We find in verse number 22, it says that it came to pass
as the camels had done drinking,
that the man took a golden earring of a half a shekel weight
two bracelets for her hands of 10 shekels weight of gold
and said, whose daughter art thou?
Tell me, I pray thee, is there room in thy father's house
for us to lodge in?
And she said unto him, I am the daughter of Bethuel,
the son of Milcah, which she bear unto Nahor.
She said, moreover unto him,
we have both strong, preventer enough, and room to lodge in.
He requested God's favor.
We find that he recognizes God's provision.
If you're taking notes, number three,
he rejoiced for answered prayer.
In verses 26 and 27, the response of Eleazar
is a proper response to answered prayer.
When God answers prayer, God's people should rejoice.
Amen?
We find that he rejoiced for answered prayer.
This response is noted.
It says in verse 26, and the man bowed down his head
and worshiped the Lord.
He bowed down his head and worshiped the Lord.
He said, God has answered my prayer.
He's rejoicing.
It says in verse number 27, he said,
blessed be the Lord God of my master Abraham,
who hath not left destitute my master of his mercy
and his truth.
I, being in the way, the Lord led me
to the house of my master's brethren.
I want you to understand that as he bows his head and worships
that he's thanking God for answered prayer,
but he's also acknowledging at the end there
of verse number 27 that he had nothing to do with it.
This was the hand of God.
This was God answering the prayer
that Eleazar had prayed.
And how encouraging, and how it must
have strengthened his faith.
We know that as we continue reading and continue
to go through the message this evening,
that not only was his faith increased
and not only was he strengthened,
but because of the specific nature of the prayer
and the specific answer that God provided,
he is able to adequately convince others
of the hand of God.
Now that's precious, because it's not his doing.
It's not him manufacturing the blessing.
It's not him manufacturing the circumstances.
He's able to sit back and say,
let me just tell you what God did.
I, being in the way, the Lord led me
to the house of my master's brethren.
He didn't know where to go, what to do, who to go.
He just prayed and said,
God, would you make my way prosperous?
Here's what I'm gonna do.
This is the best plan I can come up with.
I'm praying, God, that the woman that I approach
and ask for a drink, that she'll say drink
and then she'll say, I'll get all thy camel's water as well.
Let that be the one.
And before he was done praying,
woman comes.
And just as he had prayed,
so he now is rejoicing for answered prayer.
You know, it's important that we thank God
when he answers prayer.
With prayer and thanksgiving.
He is to be honored, he is to be exalted.
When we're able to testify to others
of how God has answered prayer in our lives,
you know that's impactful to people.
When you can stand and testify and say,
listen, I prayed about this.
And God answered my prayers.
Why?
Because we serve a God who hears and answers prayer.
Notice, in the next several verses,
we find, if you're taking notes,
number four, he rehearsed the events.
The journey and arrival is recorded for us
in verses 28 through 33.
The Bible says, the damsel ran and told them
of her mother's house, these things.
And Rebecca had a brother and his name was Laban.
And Laban ran out unto the man, unto the well.
And it came to pass, when he saw the earring
and bracelets upon his sister's hands,
when he heard the words of Rebecca, his sister,
saying, thus spake the man unto me,
that he came unto the man, and behold,
he stood by the camels at the well.
And he said, come in, thou blessed of the Lord,
wherefore standest thou without?
For I have prepared the house and room for the camels.
And the man came into the house,
and he ungirded his camels,
and gave straw and provender for the camels,
and water to wash his feet,
and the men's feet that were with him.
And there was set meat before him to eat.
But notice what he says.
I will not eat until I have told mine errand,
and he said, speak on.
So now we find that Eliezer is going to rehearse the events.
They've now arrived at Rebecca's home,
and we find that the Bible tells us
that he said, in verse number 34,
I am Abraham's servant.
And the Lord hath blessed my master greatly.
God had already told us that in verse number one,
when he told us that Abraham was stricken in age,
he was old, and that the Lord had blessed Abraham
in all things.
And Eliezer said, the Lord hath blessed.
to my master greatly.
And it says this in verse 35,
and he has become great,
and he hath given him flocks and herds
and silver and gold and menservants
and maidservants and camels and asses.
And Sarah, my master's wife,
bare a son to my master when she was old,
and unto him hath he given all that he hath.
And my master made me swear,
saying, thou shalt not take a wife to my son
of the daughters of the Canaanites
in whose land I dwell,
but thou shalt go into my father's house
and to my kindred and take a wife unto my son.
And I said unto my master,
peradventure, the woman will not follow me.
And he said unto me, the Lord,
before whom I walk will send his angel with thee,
and notice this, and prosper thy way.
Thou shalt take a wife for my son of my kindred
and of my father's house.
Then shalt thou be clear from this my oath
when thou comest to my kindred,
and if they give not thee one,
thou shalt be clear from my oath.
So he gives the backstory to Laban and to the household,
and he says, here's why I'm here,
here's the reason for my journey,
and he provides this introduction and this review
with regard to who he was and why he was there,
and we find that now as we come to verse number 42,
he says, and I came this day unto the well,
and he rehearses what he prayed.
I said, O Lord God of my master Abraham,
if now thou do prosper my way which I go,
behold, I stand by the well of water,
and it shall come to pass
that when the virgin cometh forth to draw water,
and I say to her, give me,
I pray thee a little water of thy pitcher to drink,
and she say to me, both drink thou,
and I will also draw for thy camels.
Let the same be the woman whom the Lord hath appointed
out for my master's son.
Now, I find that as he's giving this word of testimony,
as he's rehearsing these events that have transpired
how that God had blessed and prospered his journey,
I find that the excitement must be building up.
As he begins to discuss, as he shares about Abraham
and how he'd been blessed and how he was great
and all that he had, surely there was a level of excitement
explaining those things, and then as he gets to the point
as to why he was there and that he was by the well
and how he prayed, and there's a measure of excitement,
but now it kind of reaches a climax, if you will,
when we come to verse number 44,
and it says, excuse me, verse 45,
and before I had done speaking in my heart,
behold, Rebecca came forth
with her pitcher on her shoulder,
and she went down unto the well and drew water,
and I said unto her, let me drink, I pray thee,
and she made haste and let down her pitcher
from her shoulder and said, drink,
and I will give thy camels drink also,
so I drank, and she made the camels drink also.
Do you not imagine that he's excited as he's sharing this?
Let me tell you why I'm here, let me introduce,
now remember, they had provided a meal,
it says in verse number 33,
and there was set meat before him to eat,
but he said, I will not eat until I have told mine Aaron.
The meal is sitting there and that's fine
and appreciated and it's customary
and it's culturally acceptable,
and he says, listen, I have something
that I need to share with you first,
and I believe that the excitement continues to build
as he's sharing the story and as he begins to rehearse
and to speak about Rebecca coming forth
and how he spoke to Rebecca and what Rebecca's response was,
it says in verse number 47,
and I asked her and said, whose daughter art thou?
And she said, the daughter of Bethuel,
of Nahor's son, whom Milcah bare unto him,
and I put the earring upon her face
and the bracelets upon her hands,
and I bowed down my head and worshiped the Lord
and blessed the Lord God of my master Abraham,
which had led me in the right way
to take my master's brother's daughter unto his son.
And now, if you will deal kindly and truly with my master,
tell me, and if not, tell me,
that I may turn to the right hand or to the left.
Isn't that amazing?
As you begin to see how he's rehearsing,
and again, if you would begin to think about the excitement
and as he told them how God worked,
there's something unique about sharing a personal testimony
of how God has worked in your life,
how God has answered the prayer that you've prayed.
As you begin to acknowledge that you had no direction,
you had no solution for the problem,
the task that was assigned to Eleazar
at the beginning of this chapter of Scripture,
this task that was assigned was beyond his ability.
Can you imagine, again, as I mentioned
at the beginning of the message,
this is a weighty responsibility,
but he trusts the Lord, he depends upon the Lord,
he prays specifically, and now he's rehearsing
this before Laban and the family of Rebekah,
and I can't imagine how they're just hearing.
Can you imagine they're hearing, and he's sharing,
and there's no manipulation,
there's no manufacturing of circumstances and events.
He's saying, this is what God did.
This is how God worked.
Now, what's your response?
It's interesting how he leaves it to them
in verse number 49, and now,
if you will deal kindly and truly with my Master,
tell me, and if not, tell me,
that I may turn to the right hand or to the left.
We've noticed and we've mentioned already
that he requested God's favor,
he recognized God's provision,
he rejoiced for answered prayer,
he rehearsed the events.
I want you to notice number five,
their response to the situation.
There being Laban and Bethuel and the family of Rebekah,
the Bible tells us in verse number 50
that they answered, they responded,
and as they have heard all that had taken place,
now again, put yourself in the dialogue here,
put yourself in the event.
When Rebekah went out to go draw water,
it was not expected that she was gonna return
with some guy that says, hey, back home,
my Master Abraham has a son,
and your daughter's supposed to marry him.
That wasn't the expectation when Rebekah left that night.
Right?
Rebekah, no doubt, had done this more than once.
She knew what she was doing,
she lets down the water,
and she's the pitcher of water,
not only for Eleazar, but for all of those camels,
and she runs back and draws and comes back
and fills the trough,
and she knew what she was doing,
no doubt she had done this before.
I'm expecting, I'm believing,
as I look at the passage of Scripture,
that this had not happened before,
that somebody comes home with her and says,
you know what I'm saying?
And Eleazar says, here's what God has done,
here's how God has worked,
so how do they respond?
They respond by acknowledging the hand of God.
It says in verse number 50,
then Laban and Bethuel answered and said,
the thing proceedeth from the Lord.
We cannot speak unto thee bad or good.
I love the way that as you look at verse number 50
and you see the response of the family of Rebekah,
that you have the opportunity to see
the way in which Eleazar,
through simply rehearsing what God did,
how that the Spirit of God,
and I understand the Holy Spirit indwells us,
and did not indwell Old Testament believers
in the same manner,
but the Spirit of God no doubt confirmed to them
that this thing proceedeth from the Lord.
And if this thing proceedeth from the Lord,
then who are we to say no, right?
How can we speak bad or good with regard to this thing?
And we notice that they acknowledge the hand of God,
and it's important that we understand this evening
as we look at this portion of Scripture,
how it is that they acknowledge the hand of God.
It's because of that specific prayer of Eleazar,
it's because of how God answered the prayer of Eleazar
that they are able to acknowledge
that this thing proceedeth from the Lord.
Had he not prayed specifically,
had he not had that specific nature of his prayer
as was recorded in verses 12 through 14,
specifically in verse number 14,
had he not prayed in that manner,
he could not have rehearsed to the family
what he rehearsed.
He could have just come to the house and said,
listen, I prayed that God would show kindness,
and man, this is the most beautiful woman
that I found down here,
and therefore I must expect that this is the wife,
the bride for my servant Isaac.
No, no.
How's that processed by Laban and by the family, right?
He says, no, I prayed specifically.
See, when you seek the face of God in that manner,
when you understand that our God is able
to answer specifically,
and you rehearse those things,
you say, let me tell you what God has done.
Let me show you how God has worked.
The response is, this thing proceedeth from the Lord.
They can see the hand of God.
And that, my brethren, is the way that we should
seek to exalt the name of our God,
we should lift up his name when we.
to understand that He is able to answer,
that He is able to do things exactly
in a manner in which would bring honor and glory
to His name,
that it would not be,
well, how do I know that was really God that did that
and not that you just figured out this way
to do this and so on and so forth?
No, no, no.
This is what God did.
This is how God works.
Psalm 109 and verse 27,
it says this, verse 26 is a prayer,
it says, help me, oh, Lord, my God.
Oh, save me according to thy mercy.
That's Psalm 109 and verse 26.
And verse 27 continues and says this,
that they may know that this is thy hand
that thou, Lord, hast done it.
Psalm 109, 26 and 27.
And I believe that as we look at this passage of scripture
in Genesis 24,
that as Eleazar is rehearsing
and reviewing all that has transpired,
the response to the situation
is one that is a direct result to the circumstances.
How could they say anything other?
The uniqueness of the prayer request,
the uniqueness of the response of Rebekah,
she didn't know that that's exactly how Eleazar had prayed.
I don't know who you are and you're asking me for water?
I mean, out of the kindness of my heart, here's some water.
You better find somebody else.
It didn't work that way.
She didn't know how he prayed
so that her response would fit the prayer.
She didn't know that.
And that's unique.
And that's exciting to see how God is able to work.
We find that their response to the situation
was an acknowledgement of the hand of God
and Eleazar immediately rejoices again.
As we notice what takes place,
it says that in verse 52,
and it came to pass that when Abraham's servant
heard their words,
he worshiped the Lord, bowing himself to the earth.
I did not read verse 51.
It says, behold, Rebekah is before thee.
Take her and go.
And let her be thy master's son-wife
as the Lord hath spoken.
Can you imagine as Eleazar heard those words?
When he heard the thing proceedeth from the Lord,
when he heard take her and go
and let her be thy servant's wife
as the Lord hath spoken,
how that must have encouraged his heart.
We find again, just as we noted in verse 26 and 27,
how that he bowed and worshiped
and blessed the Lord for answered prayer,
that it says that when Abraham's servant heard their words,
he worshiped the Lord, bowing himself to the earth.
Immediately after the response of the family
and after his worship of the Lord,
the Bible tells us that in the next few verses,
there's a discussion with regard to the departure.
It says that the servant brought forth jewels of silver
and jewels of gold and raiment and gave them to Rebekah.
He gave also to her brother
and to her mother precious things.
And they did eat and drink,
he and the men that were with him,
and tarried all night.
They rose up in the morning and he said,
send me away unto my master.
He did not desire to tarry for any length of time.
This was a mission that he was on,
a responsibility that he had given from his master Abraham.
And he was ready to depart.
He had a desire, of course,
for Rebekah to return with him.
The Bible says in verse number 55,
and her brother and her mother said,
let the damsel abide with us a few days,
at the least 10, after that she shall go.
Now, 10 days really isn't that long.
It really isn't.
But I see a measure of excitement
here in this text of Scripture,
coupled with, remember, the faith of Abraham.
Abraham, I believe, the text doesn't tell us this,
but I believe that Abraham was probably praying
for Eliezer to have a prosperous journey.
As Abraham sends Eliezer on the way,
as Abraham reveals and communicates to his servant
his faith and his confidence and how God was going to work,
he didn't know exactly what God was going to do,
but he knew that God would work.
And he, Eliezer, no doubt, has a desire.
I wanna get back to Abraham.
I wanna get back to Isaac.
I mean, I don't wanna wait 10 days.
He says, at the least 10.
You mean it could be more?
No, no, I wanna get back.
There's excitement.
He said unto them, hinder me not.
Notice again this phrase,
seeing the Lord hath prospered my way,
send me away that I may go to my master.
How did he know that God had prospered his way?
Because he prayed specifically.
And God answered.
And he says, send me away.
And it says in verse number 58,
it says, well, in verse 57, it says,
they said, we will call the damsel and inquire at her mouth.
They called Rebekah and said unto her,
wilt thou go with this man?
I know there's probably not a lengthy pause,
but you ever been in a situation
where a second feels like 10 minutes?
Right, that pause of a moment
seems like eternity almost.
You know what I mean?
And when they say, wilt thou go with this man?
In my mind's eye, Eliezer is there waiting for a response.
And though the delay may have been just a nanosecond,
he's probably anxiously awaiting the response.
And she said, I will go.
I will go.
Man, I don't know what Eliezer did.
I don't know if he leaped.
I don't know what he did.
But I think he's excited about all that has transpired.
He's already mentioned about the Lord prospering his way.
And now as Rebekah is called in,
and she's asked, wilt thou go with this man?
She says, I will go.
Oh, the excitement.
In verse 60, she's blessed by her family,
it says, and they blessed Rebekah and said unto her,
thou art our sister.
Be thou the mother of thousands of millions
and let thy seed possess the gate of those which hate them.
As we think about this response to the situation again,
I mean, Rebekah had gone out the day before
to get some water and how the lives
of these Bible characters have changed in just a moment.
But God's hand is evident, clearly evidenced
in the text of Scripture that God is at work,
that God is moving, that God is directing.
We find that their response, again,
not to belabor the point too much,
but their response, I believe, is the direct result
of the specific nature of the prayer of Eleazar.
Because he prayed specifically,
he was able to rehearse those events,
which impacted, influenced the way that they responded.
And their response was one of agreement.
Their response was one of blessing.
We find number six this evening, the return home.
In verses 61 through 67,
God gives us the record of their return.
It says that Rebekah arose in her damsels
and they rode upon the camels and followed the man
and the servant took Rebekah and went his way.
The Bible tells us now of Isaac,
he came from the way of the well,
Lehiroi, for he dwelt in the south country.
And Isaac went out to meditate in the field
at the eventide and he lifted up his eyes
and saw and behold, the camels were coming.
Level of excitement, a level of anticipation.
Is Eleazar coming back with a bride?
Is he coming back empty-handed?
I mean, what's going on?
And we find that he's there.
It tells us that he came from the way of the well,
Lehiroi, that he was now in the field
and he was meditating at eventide
and he lifts up his eyes and he sees
and Rebekah, she also lifted up her eyes
and she saw Isaac and she lighted off the camel
and said unto the servant, Eleazar,
what man is this that walketh in the field to meet us?
The servant had said, it is my master.
Therefore, she took a veil and covered herself.
There's another rehearsing that takes place
in verse 66 where the Bible tells us here
as they arrive that now there's this explanation
and the servant told Isaac all things that he had done.
We will not take the time this evening
to backtrack through the entirety
of the passage of scripture,
but we understand that as this dialogue takes place
and it's summarized in one single verse of scripture
that Eleazar is now communicating to Isaac
all that had transpired and how God had prospered his way.
I believe that Isaac was no doubt excited
at hearing all that had transpired as.
as Isaac would understand the task that had been assigned,
as Isaac would understand
and had been anticipating the return of Eleazar
and understanding that his bride no doubt
was to accompany him back home.
And we find that here is Rebekah
and Eleazar explains all that has transpired.
He told Isaac all things that he had done.
It's exciting to hear how God works.
It is.
It's exciting to see the hand of God
at work in your life.
And to be able to rejoice
and to be able to rehearse
and to speak of the greatness of God.
The Bible tells us that this explanation
is provided in verse 67.
We find the consummation of marriage.
It says that Isaac brought her,
speaking of Rebekah,
into his mother Sarah's tent
and took Rebekah and she became his wife
and he loved her and Isaac was comforted
after his mother's death.
As we look here at this consummation of the marriage
and we understand how that as we move forward
through the book of Genesis,
the importance of this chapter
and this event and all that has transpired,
and we understand how that God would bless
and we'll look at a number of things
as we move through the book of Genesis
and really as we go back to the 24th chapter
and we remember how God divinely worked,
that will cause us as the people of God to rejoice.
Our God is able to still work in like fashion.
Our God today still hears and answers prayer.
Amen?
Listen, when we consider tonight
this passage of Scripture,
when we can rejoice
and we can look at all that has transpired
and take these six snapshots of these 67 verses
and we can say, man, look at this,
look at what has happened.
But the things that were written aforetime
were written for our learning and for our admonition
and so then faith cometh by hearing
and hearing by the Word of God
and as we look at a passage of Scripture like this,
we ought to rejoice that our God is able
and we ought to be challenged in our prayer life
to pray specifically.
It's a different context in Malachi than what we see here,
but if you would allow me to take it out of context
for the purpose of application,
there the context is with giving
and how God says prove me with regard to giving
that God will bless and so on and so forth.
That's the proper interpretation
as I've mentioned many times from this pulpit.
Scripture has one interpretation but many applications
and I believe that we can take that phrase
that God says to His people in Malachi
and we can apply it in our lives today
in a broad sense of areas and say prove me.
God says prove me.
Why are we scared to pray specifically?
Is it that we don't think God can answer specifically?
But when we see that Eliezer is praying specifically,
something that for me this evening
is beyond my ability to fully comprehend
as to how he prayed the way that he prayed
and how before he was done speaking,
God's already answering.
It's coming to pass exactly as he prayed.
How encouraging.
In a way in which Eliezer is able to say,
God has prospered my way,
God has shown kindness
and in a way, in a manner in which others
that hear are able to say,
the thing proceedeth from the Lord.
The thing proceedeth from the Lord
as the Lord hath spoken.
That we would see God work in very distinct ways.
I trust this evening that as we look at a passage
of scripture like this, that we can rejoice
in the way in which God provided a wife for Isaac.
And certainly that should cause us to rejoice.
But I hope tonight that we'd be challenged.
That we'd be challenged in our own walk with God.
We spoke this morning about being people of prayer.
We see tonight about these specific prayers.
The nature of his prayer.
And how specific are we in our prayers?
If we just say, God, would you bless that person?
If I pray for Ron this week and say, God, bless him,
bless him real good.
Next Sunday I see Ron or Wednesday night I see Ron.
Ron, how you doing?
I'm doing well.
Yes, God answered my prayer.
God's blessing him real good.
I mean, I don't even know what that means.
You know why I don't know what that means?
Because sometimes we look at blessing
being that everything's perfect and good
and just abundance of everything.
But sometimes God's blessing comes
in different size and shapes, right?
A trial is a blessing.
Amen?
And so all of a sudden Ron's going through a trial
and I prayed, God, bless him good, real good.
And I'm saying, oh man.
I mean, now he's got a trial.
It's a mess.
We begin to pray specifically.
We see God answer specifically and it increases our faith
and it impacts others just as it did for Rebecca's family.
As they're hearing this, tell me that part again.
You were at the well and you prayed what?
Yeah, yeah, that's what I prayed.
And Rebecca came.
I mean, you were still kind of finishing up praying
and then Rebecca's there, yep.
And you went and asked Rebecca for water.
Yep, that's what I did.
And she said what?
She said she was gonna get water for all the camels?
Yep.
Do you understand what I'm saying?
I mean, it increases our faith, but it impacts others.
Oh, that God would help us.
Tonight as we look at a passage like this
to be encouraged, but to be challenged.
Father, we love you.
We thank you for loving us.
Thank you for the word of God,
the truth that is contained therein.
Thank you for an account.
Genesis 24.
All the details that are provided help us.
It could have just told us that the servant of Abraham
went to the house of Rebecca.
And Rebecca returned to be the wife of Isaac.
And that would be settled fact.
But God, in your wisdom,
you chose to provide us with all of these details
that encourage us and I trust challenge us as well.
I pray tonight you'd help us, Lord,
to rejoice in answered prayer.
I ask, Lord, tonight that you'd challenge us
in our own prayer lives, individually and corporately.
God, that you'd help us to pray specifically,
to help us to respond by rejoicing when you answer.
That we'd have the opportunity to inform each other
that we'd have the opportunity to influence
and impact others.
That we truly see what you're capable of doing.
There's one not sure of heaven.
I pray tonight, even as we sang that song,
when I see the blood, they would understand.
Chiefest of sinners, Jesus will save.
Because the blood of Christ is precious, powerful.
Paul said this is a faithful saying
and worthy of all acceptation,
that Christ Jesus came into the world
to save sinners, of whom I am chief.
Lord, would you work in these few moments of invitation?
Would you speak to hearts?
Would you help us, Lord, to respond,
to be doers of the word?
We pray that you'd seal each decision
and we'll thank you for it.
In Christ's name we pray.